---
layout: post
title: ImpactJS Tutorial
tags: [Tutorial]
image:
  feature: abstract-1.jpg
  background: tweed.png
---

Throughout Spring 2013 - Fall 2014, I have taken part in building three games using the ImpactJS Game Engine within the City College of New York's Game development club. As the Game Development club begins to meet in Fall 2014, I have decided to pass on my knowledge and experiences through giving a presentation on getting started with ImpactJS and developing your first game with it. As such, this tutorial serves as an in-depth, step-by-step guide to building your very own platforming game. 


#### Why ImpactJS?

At the start of the Game Development club in Spring 2013 (back when there was only a single team), we were experimenting with several game engines at the time. After spending a few weeks trying out various frameworks and building simple games, we realized how much functionality would have to be built just to create a simple game. These features revolved around player physics, camera options, enemies/artificial intelligence, level transitioning, and most of all: collision. At that time, building our own game framework was not an option - which is when we stumbled upon ImpactJS. 

ImpactJS provides all of the features noted above and more, exposing easy methods for creating entities (players, enemies), level transitioning, camera functionalities and collision. To top it all off, ImpactJS comes with its own Tile Editor - Weltmeister. Weltmeister provides an easy to use interface for loading level assets, adding/removing layers, setting up collisions, and exporting the level for use within ImpactJS itself. At the moment, ImpactJS costs a hefty $100, but if you can get over the cost then you've got your hands on a very powerful game engine. 

#### Skills / Pre-requisites 

To get the most of this tutorial, you should have some understanding of the following:

* Basic knowledge of JavaScript (Types, pointers, scope)
* Basic usage of your terminal (Navigating directories, creating folders and files)

Knowledge of using your terminal is not required (as you can create files manually), but it is recommended to learn. Throughout this tutorial, I will often use bash commands native to UNIX systems (Mac OS X, Linux). 

#### Project Skeleton / Structure

To download the final product of this tutorial, you may do so <a style="color:blue" href="https://github.com/DrkSephy/ACM-Game-Presentation">here</a>. At the end of this tutorial, your project structure should look like the following: 

{% highlight bash %}

├── index.html
├── lib
│   ├── game
│   │   ├── entities
│   │   │   ├── goomba.js
│   │   │   ├── mushroom.js
│   │   │   └── player.js
│   │   ├── levels
│   │   │   └── test.js
│   │   └── main.js
│   ├── impact
│   │   ├── animation.js
│   │   ├── background-map.js
│   │   ├── collision-map.js
│   │   ├── debug
│   │   │   ├── debug.css
│   │   │   ├── debug.js
│   │   │   ├── entities-panel.js
│   │   │   ├── graph-panel.js
│   │   │   ├── maps-panel.js
│   │   │   └── menu.js
│   │   ├── entity.js
│   │   ├── font.js
│   │   ├── game.js
│   │   ├── image.js
│   │   ├── impact.js
│   │   ├── input.js
│   │   ├── loader.js
│   │   ├── map.js
│   │   ├── sound.js
│   │   ├── system.js
│   │   └── timer.js
│   └── weltmeister
│       ├── api
│       │   ├── browse.php
│       │   ├── config.php
│       │   ├── glob.php
│       │   └── save.php
│       ├── arrow.png
│       ├── collisiontiles-64.png
│       ├── config.js
│       ├── edit-entities.js
│       ├── edit-map.js
│       ├── entities.js
│       ├── evented-input.js
│       ├── jquery-1.7.1.min.js
│       ├── jquery-ui-1.8.1.custom.min.js
│       ├── modal-dialogs.js
│       ├── select-file-dropdown.js
│       ├── tile-select.js
│       ├── undo.js
│       ├── weltmeister.css
│       └── weltmeister.js
├── media
│   ├── 04b03.font.png
│   ├── bg
│   │   └── star.png
│   ├── coin.png
│   ├── enemies
│   │   └── goomba.png
│   ├── fg
│   │   └── forest.png
│   ├── gameover.png
│   ├── mushroom.png
│   ├── player.png
│   └── screen.png
├── server.py
└── weltmeister.html

{% endhighlight %}

Please note that the following files are provided for you upon downloading ImpactJS: `weltmeister.html`, `index.html`, `impact folder`, `weltmeister folder`. 