---
layout: post
title: 500 Day Commit Streak
date: 2015-07-02
tags: [Post]
author: "David Leonard"
header-img: "img/darkscape.jpg"
---

February 19th, 2014 - the day the streak began. I started working on a project called <a style="color:#FC645F" href="https://github.com/chessmasterhong/WaterEmblem">Water Emblem </a> alongside my good friend <a style="color:#FC645F" href="https://github.com/chessmasterhong">Kevin Chan</a>. At the time we didn't know how long or how much effort would be put into this project, but it quickly grew into the largest project ever created, and lead to the start of the streak which would continue to on for 500 days and more afterwards. Throughout this blog post, I'll be backtracking through project highlights and the benefits of coding everyday. 

#### Water Emblem

<a style="color:#FC645F" href="https://github.com/chessmasterhong/WaterEmblem">Water Emblem</a> is a remake of <a style="color:#FC645F" href="http://fireemblem.wikia.com/wiki/Fire_Emblem:_Rekka_no_Ken">Rekka No Ken</a>, a turn-based tactical role playing strategy game in which the game player controls an army of units, similar to a game of Chess. At the start of development, we weren't sure which direction the game would go. It required <a style="color:#FC645F" href="https://github.com/chessmasterhong/WaterEmblem/blob/master/notes/task_tree.txt">many features</a> in a short amount of time, and our experience with building such a complex game was limited. Fire Emblem was my dream game to re-create, and I quickly became fixated on coming as close as possible to the actual game. Minutes turned to hours which turned to days and so on - until months passed. 

During this time period, I coded each and every day building out new features for the game. Some days I would code for 12 to 14 hours, working on the next big feature. This project was by far the first one to truly interest me and get me into programming side-projects, and I attribute it to the start of the streak. My thirst for knowledge kept rolling on, and over the course of 6 straight months I developed features for Water Emblem and clocked in well over 1,500 hours in total writing code, developing wireframes and prototypes. 

After development on Water Emblem finished, I moved on to learning Full-stack JavaScript using MongoDB, Express.js, Angular.js and Node.js.

#### Technetium (Git)

<a style="color:#FC645F" href="https://github.com/DrkSephy/git-technetium">Git Technetium</a> is a remake of <a style="color:#FC645F" href="http://technetium.herokuapp.com/">Technetium</a>, a project I created using Django. At this stage in my programming track, I realized the best way to learn a framework or development stack is to attempt to rebuild an existing project - so I began by doing research on the stack. I quickly pieced together the flow of an application built with the so-called MEAN stack - a development stack in which we create a RESTful API backend using Node.js coupled with Express.js which would return JSON to the client-side which is then rendered using a client-side framework such as Angular, Ember or React, coupled with MongoDB for storing JSON responses. At the time of creating this project, I decided on using Angular as the client-side framework for their powerful two-way binding and ability to create responsive single-page applications. 

The motivation behind this project was to successfully build a functioning, useful web application while learning this new and hot JavaScript development stack. We built a RESTful API using Node.js, Express.js and Github's API, allowing the user to query data such as commits per developer in a repository, issues closed/opened/assigned, how many lines of code were contributed by each developer, and so on. When a query is performed, JSON is returned to the Angular.js client which then renders the template based on the data received. While this application was simple at the base level, it taught me various paradigms around asynchronous programming, avoiding <a style="color:#FC645F" href="http://callbackhell.com/">callback hell</a> using <a style="color:#FC645F" href="https://github.com/caolan/async">async.js</a> and learning to perform web requests using the <a style="color:#FC645F" href="https://github.com/request/request">requests</a> library for node. 

In Fall of 2014, I began pursuing my Master's degree in Computer Science, where I took a course in Compiler Construction - leading me to my next project.

#### Pascal Compiler 

As the name would suggest, my Compiler Construction class required students to write their own compiler for the Pascal programming language. Due to my familiarity with Python, I chose to implement <a style="color:#FC645F" href="https://github.com/DrkSephy/pascal-compiler">my pascal compiler</a> with it. As an added challenge, I decided to implement this compiler using purely Python with no outside libraries for developing lexers or parsers. 

At the end of the class, I learned how to develop my own grammars for building single-pass parsers with patch-up (for if/else/jump statements), build a scanner and lexer from the ground up, generating my own machine code for execution and then writing an emulator to execute these custom-made assembly instructions. My compiler was able to handle complicated programs using arrays, loops and all control statements. 

While working on my Compiler, I also began doing Graduate research for the <a style="color:#FC645F" href="http://www.noaa.gov/">National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration</a>. 

#### Graduate Research

As a new graduate student, I sought out a research project which would tie in the web technologies that I've come to love. 





